***Zoning and Land Use in the U.S.: History, Theory, and Regional Variation***

This independent study explores the structure, function, and variation of land use regulation in the United States, with a primary focus on zoning. The course examines how zoning has historically operated as a tool of spatial and social governance, and how regulatory outcomes are shaped by not only ideology and party control but also procedural rules, institutional design, and organized interests. Through a combination of theoretical texts and empirical research, the student will analyze the evolution of zoning practices, evaluate regional variation, and begin preliminary data exploration using land use regulation indices and policy datasets. The course also prepares the groundwork for dissertation research on the intersection of zoning, political institutions, and housing policy.
<br/>
<br/>
**Zoning Timeline - <span style="color: red;">In Progress</span>**
<br/>
<iframe 
  src="https://127wt3-warren-wooten.shinyapps.io/timeline/" 
  width="95%" 
  height="400" 
  style="border:1px solid #ccc;">
</iframe>

**Weekly Notes & Progress**
<br/>
*Weeks of Sept 14th & 22nd*
<br/>
This week, I am reading "Home, Sweet Home: American Residential Zoning in Comparative Perspective" by Sonia Hirt and chapter 3 of Burns. I have also done some preliminary work identifying additional candidate papers for a literature review.<br/>
Hirt takes a comparative historical approach to the development of US Zoning. Hirt notes that prominent actors in US zoning policy looked with admiration at European approaches to zoning, mainly German policy. Notably, the city of Frankfurt was the first modern city to enact a complete city zoning ordinance in 1891. While zoning proponents borrowed from their European neighbors, Hirt finds key departures that lead American zoning policy in a uniquely American direction. The most notable of these is the treatment of single-family detached residential dwellings and the neighborhood that contains them. Europeans use zoning to separate certain activities incompatible with home life from home locations. These uses, such as animal processing or heavy industrial, are excluded from residential use zones. This leaves a variety of non-residential uses, shops, cafes, etc., that are still included in zones where residential uses are allowed. Much of American zoning work is exactly opposite, excluding all uses except residental from residential zones.<br/>
On an aside and out of curiosity, I conducted some research on the history of Zoning in Charlotte, the host city of UNCC. Charlotte's first zoning regulations were passed on January 14, 1947, with a local paper noting Charlotte as the last major city in the nation to adopt zoning. During and immediately after the adoption, concerns and protests were lodged. On the business side, several council members sought the removal of setback requirements in business and industrial districts, ostensibly due to the reduction in buildable area on those lots. At the same meeting where zoning was passed, a group petitioned to prevent apartment development on Providence Road. By March, builders are appearing before the council to protest the restrictive nature of the ordinance regarding apartment development. The limited evidence I found suggests that Charlotte experienced significant growth following the end of World War II, which precipitated interest in using zoning to control growth.  
The origins of policymakers' rationale for zoning are varied and often not apparent. In many cases, it's portrayed to the public as a tool to ensure health and safety, and to propagate the orderly development of cities.  Significant evidence suggests that these may not have been the motivations of the writers and adopters of the first American zoning ordinances. Fischel presents a compelling argument that protectionism, in response to industrialization and transportation advancements, was the initial catalyst for zoning, intending to safeguard business interests. If you extend the definition of business interest to the interest one places in protecting their home from encroachment of other land uses, Hirt's observations support Fischel's arguments. <br/><br/>
*Week of Sept 7th*<br/>
This week I have started with the first two chapters of Nancy Burn's work, The Formation of American Local Governments. The purpose of this study is to understand land use in the United States; to do so requires an understanding of the institutions that hold the power to regulate and enforce land use and zoning restrictions. Burns identifies two types of local governments: municipalities and special districts. <br/>
Burns distinguishes between the two; special districts are geographically overlapping other political boundaries, typically single-use or holding a few powers, and can be established by a small group of well-resourced individuals or groups. Municipalities are geographically defined in ways that do not overlap other municipalities, hold a broad range of power, and require a large group of people working together to form. What I found most interesting about government formation is the reasoning behind it, speaking of special districts (but it can be applied to municipalities as well), Burns writes, "These formations are not simply technical financing maneuvers. They are instead implicit decisions about who pays for development in the United States." Burns goes on to discuss how city formation throughout much of the United States is, in itself, a speculative and entrepreneurial activity. Cities and the services they provide were valued by residents who were willing to pay higher land prices to live in them. Early on in city formation, entrepreneurs and, later, officials, land owners, and local businesses needed growth to survive. City formers needed land sales, businesses needed customers, and officials needed taxpayers. However, as cities expanded, the challenges of and competition for resources also increased. It's in this climate that the use of zoning is first witnessed in the US.<br/>
Fischel, in "An Economic History of Zoning and a Cure for its Exclusionary Effects," argues that zoning is correlated to the expansion of new transportation modes, and its primary purpose was to protect land values. Fischel points to a theory by Albert Brenton that zoning's purpose was "an alternative to non-existent home value insurance". First, Fischel points to the expansion of train transportation, especially subways and truck freight, both of which allow manufacturing to move away from ports and nautical shipping lanes. Subways in New York also allowed for growth. The garment district, an area of New York housing the garment industry, was constrained by both floor space and access to workers. The advent of skyscrapers allowed for more development per square foot of developable land. This allowed for larger factories, which could support the cost of this type of development. The industry was still constrained by how many factory workers could feasibly access the job site. With the arrival of the subway in 1901, access to the garment district became easier for workers living farther out. By 1915, the subway lines reached an annual ridership of 830 million. 
<br/>
**Files**<br/>
[Syllabus](./contents/Independent%20Study%20-%208800%20Wooten.pdf)



